Newsgroups: sci.med.nutrition
From: altar@beaufort.sfu.ca (Ted Wayn Altar)
Subject: Vitamin B12 and Vegans
Message-ID: <altar.727054890@sfu.ca>
Organization: Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, B.C., Canada
Date: Thu, 14 Jan 1993 23:41:30 GMT
Lines: 546

>Michael Traub wrote:
> B12 deficiency is more common in omnivores than in vegans.

>Martin Hulsey replied:
> Do you have a peer-reviewed reference from a bona fide nutrition 
> journal that says this?  I have a couple that say quite the opposite.


FACTORS THAT AFFECT DIETARY B12 NEEDS

     (1). Meat or other animal products and refined carbohydrates
          (sugars) when used generously may more than double B12
          needs.

     (2).  Persons who use drugs, chemical, or beverages which
          destroy B12 (e.g., tobacco, alcohol, caffeine, etc.)

     (3).  Megadoses of vitamin C may produce B12 deficiency by
          destroying the cobalamins during transport through the
          gastrointestinal tract (Hines, 1975).  Quantities more
          than 1/2 of a gram can destroy 50% to 95% of B12 in
          the food.

     (4).  Oral contraceptives are used (affects the B12 binders
          of the blood).

     (5).  egg albumin and egg yolk decreases B12 absorption

     (6) intestinal parasitism (e.g., tapeworms) and explosively
         growing bacterial floras can effectively compete with
         the host for the vitamin

Given these factors that do increase need, it is apparent that
meat eaters do need more B12, but presumably this is adequately
compensated for by the fact that they consume more dietary B12.
It is of course possible that the compensation may not be great
enough.  Rather than only speculate, however, upon a
"theoretical" deficiency, it would be best to have in hand some
actual actuarial data documenting from large samples the relative
rates of B12 deficiency disease among omnivores as compared to
vegans.  So far, I've not seen any such actuarial data compiled.
But this is understandable when we keep in mind that B12
deficiency is actually rare and of the cases occurring 95% of
those cases are not due to a simple dietary deficiency but rather
to physiological absorption/utilization problems.


B12 DEFICIENCY AMONG VEGAN INFANTS AND CHILDREN

There are, however, amply studies (see Chanarin et al., 1985;
Dagnelie et al, 1989a; Dagnelie, 1989b) upon some groups of
vegans whose young  children and infants are documented to show
an higher than expected incidence of the signs and symptoms of
B12 deficiency (see references below).  This concern for the
children of some fad vegetarians that should be seriously noted.
There is enough evidence (see references below) to here warrant
concern that some vegan groups do incur a risk of B12 deficiency
among their young children.  In particular, vegetarian groups
prone to certain "fad" vegetarianism like that of macrobiotic or
crudivore diets, seem to sometimes (again, not consistently) have
a higher incidence of B12 deficiencies among their young
children.

RECOMMENDED AMOUNTS OF B12

times greater than our actual requirement).

Absorption of the vitamin also decreases with increased intake.
At low levels of intake the mean absorption is 70% (even higher
for people with low serum levels of B12), but at high intake
levels the absorption rate drops to about 16%.

The fact of the matter is that you need very little and your body
can store the stuff for 3 to 5 years.  Hence, you simply don't
need to consume B12 every day.  Another point maybe to keep in
mind is that researchers really don't know how much low levels of
B12 is in our foodstuffs since their is not yet a sensitive
enough  assay for trace amounts of B12.

The main rout of loss of bodily B12 in the bile, while most of
the bile is effectively reabsorbed (more than 90%), some is not
thereby making for a loss of B12 (about .1 microgram/day).
Because vegans generally eat less fat and no cholesterol, their
production of bile is less and it is therefore likely that their
need for B12 replacement would also be less.


VEGAN  SOURCES OF B12

It has been reported that B12 is to be found on the roots and
stems of tomatoes, cabbage, celery, kale, broccoli, and leeks.
Victor Herbert, however, found that "well washed" plant foods
contain no B12 except for trace amounts in some rhibozium-
bacteria-containing root nodules.

yeast, had mean intakes of 15 micrograms or about 660% of US RDA
for children.  In none of the above groups were any clinical
signs of deficiency found.

     ". . . vegetarians appear to "undergo physiological
     adaptation enabling them to make somewhat better utilization
     of iron than would be expected from iron bioavailability
     studies involving the feeding of vegetarian diets to
     omnivores or involving the testing of particular components
     characteristic of vegetarian diets with omnivore subjects."
          (from Kies & McEndree "Vegetarianism and the
           bioavailability of iron" in Kies (ed.) NUTRITIONAL
           BIOAVAILABILITY OF IRON, 1982).

ARE ADULT VEGANS AT A GREATER RISK OF B12 DEFICIENCY?

of an omnivorous control group, hematologic evidence of vitamin
B12 deficiency is not present.

As Gill Langely reports:

    levels of the vitamin, while VEGAN MACROBIOTICS OR SMOKERS
    MAY BE PREDISPOSED TO B12 DEFICIENCY.

    of haemoglobin in the blood.

    food fortified with the vitamin, and those who did had higher
    amounts in their blood.  THE SERUM LEVELS OF THREE SUBJECTS
    WHO HAD BEEN VEGAN FOR 6-13 YEARS (LONG ENOUGH THEORETICALLY
    TO EXHAUST LIVER STORES OF B12) WITH NO OBVIOUS DIETARY
    SOURCE OF B12 WERE ALSO ADEQUATE, at 120-230pg/ml.  All the
    vegans were healthy, none showed symptoms of B12 deficiency
    and all had normal haemoglobin values.  The same report lists
    other surveys of vegans which have failed to show symptoms of
    dietary deficiency of B12.  [emphasis his]


Of course, people will cite some case studies of some unfortunate
vegans but such case studies are limited in that we don't have a
proper comparison with non-vegans and by now it should be
apparent that many other causes besides dietary deficiency can be
at fault.  If one looks at these case studies closely, the
individuals are often reported as having other deficiencies
thereby undermining the very point that such cases might thought
to have illustrated in the first place.

What is interesting is that B12 is so extremely rare that even
single case studies get published, but the generalizability of
such case-studies to the general population of vegans is not to
automatically be undertaken.  More evidence than this is needed,
especially when the confound of physiological
aborption/utilization problems are often not properly ruled out
in these case studies.


CAUSE FOR VEGAN PANIC?

Let it again be said, however, that B12 deficiency is "rare"
among vegans and that over 95% of deficiency problems are not due
to a simple intake inadequacy but are due to an malabsorption
problem.  the development of a serious B12 deficiency is not a
simple or well understood matter but it is known that absorption
and conservation of B12 in the body is more important than how
much is to be found in the diet.

known causes of malabsorption are a lack of intrinsic factor
(e.g., due to pernicious anemia, destruction of gastric mucosa,
etc.), removal or disease of the second portion of the ileum,
competition for B12 by microorganisms or intestinal parasites,
toxic substances, etc.

beside malabsorption, there are also possible problems (see
herbert, 1973) in utilization (e.g., enzyme deficiencies, liver
or kidney disease, etc), increase loss (e.g., renal disease) or
for an increase requirement (e.g., hyperthyroidism, lactose
intolerance).

still, if one has an absorption, loss, or increase need problem,
then presumably when little B12 is available in the diet then
still less is going to be assimilated.  now, what can vegans do
to prevent a B12 deficiency?



HOW VEGANS MIGHT INCREASE THEIR B12 INTAKES

Since B12 is predominantly produced by bacteria (no animal
produces its own), then foods grown in soils where the bacteria
flora is rich would presumable have more B12 on their surface.
Hence, organically grown foods will probably be richer in B12.

TAKING SUPPLEMENTS.

For healthy adult vegans I do think we should be careful about
recommending routine B12 supplements.  Even though complete
absorption is not likely, the dosages are probably still too high
(1200 mcg).  There is some case studies and experimental evidence
that an excessive B12 consumption encourages cell division in
general and certain tumor cells in particular (bergevin et al.,
1976; chauvergne, 1970).

Non-smoking, healthy adult vegans who eat sensibly, are not on
medications (e.g., antibiotics) and who do not daily drink
alcohol probably do not need to take supplements.  If such vegans
are going to take supplements, then they should probably not take
them on regular basis since the doses are too high.

all investigators reporting on vegans report them as being above
average in health and more active.


FINAL WORD:


REFERENCES 1: General

Abdulla et al. (1981).  Nutrient intake and health status of
    vegans Chemical analyses of diets using the duplicate portion
    sampling technique.  AM. J. CLIN. NUTR., 34:2464-77.

Herbert, V. (1962).  Harmful B12 breakdown products in
    multivitamins?  MEDICAL WORLD NEWS, (Sept. 28):12-13.

Herbert, V. (1973).  The five possible causes of all nutrient
    deficiency: Illustrated by deficiencies of vitamin B12 and
    folic acid.  AMER. J. OF CLIN. NUTRITION, 26:77.

 Herbert, V. (1988).  Vitamin B12: plant sources, requirements,
    and assay.  AMER. J. OF CLINICAL NUTRITION, 48(3):852.

Hines, J. (1975).  Ascorbic acid and vitamin B12 deficiency.  J.
    OF AMER. MED. ASSOC., 234(1):24.

Thrash & Thrash (1982).  NUTRITION FOR VEGETARIANS, 1982.


REFERENCES 2:  Group comparison studies involving adult
vegetarians.

Bar-Sella et al. (1990).   Vitamin B12 and folate levels in long-
    term vegans.  ISRAEL JOURNAL OF MEDICAL SCIENCES. 26(6):309

    NUTRITION, 56(3):555.

Rana et al. (1986).  Taurine concentratins in the diet, plasm,
    urine and breast milk of vegans compared with omnivores.  BR.
    J. NUTR., 56:17-27.

Sanders et al. (1977).  Haematological studies on vegans.  BRIT.
    J. OF NUTR., 40:9

Sanders, T. (1978).  The health and nutritional status of vegans.
    PLANT. FDS. MAN, 2:181-93.

Sanders & Purves (1981).  An anthropometric and dietary
    assessment of nutritional status of vegan preschoold
    children. J. HUM. NUTR., 35:349-57.

Sanders et al. (1987).  Blood pressure, plasma renin activity and
    aldosterone concentration in vegans and omnivore controls.
    Hum. Nutr.: Appl. Nutr., 41A:204-11

Smith (1962).  Veganism, a clincal survey with observations of
    vitamin B12 metabolism.  THE BRIT. MED. J, 1(June 16):1655.

Wokes et al. (1955).  "Human dietary deficiency of vitamin B12.
    THE AMER. J. OF CLIN. NUTR., 3(5):375